Project: TRAITS, An approach to study the
ecology of marine microbial communities based on traits and guilds

Sandra Martínez (Vigo): Experimental

Jose (ULL): Bioinformatics

Javier Tamares & Carlos Pedrós (CNB, Madrid): Bioinformatics
------------------------------------------------------------

OBJETIVE:

"The final objective of this project is to analyze how the microbial communities are structured by guilds, groups of taxa using the same resources in a similar way. This will require determination of the taxonomic composition of guilds and of their changes in space and time."

"In the present project we will take a different approach. Instead of focusing on groups of taxa
collaborating with each other, we will focus on groups of taxa defined as guilds (see below), whose
members presumably compete with each other."

GUILDS: "Root (1967) defined guilds as ‘‘a group of species that exploit the same class of environmental resources in a similar way. This term groups together species, without regard to taxonomic position, that overlap significantly in their niche requirements”

TRAIT: ability to acquire a required resource (such as nitrogen)

"The set of species that acquire a resource in a similar way, e.g. nitrogen acquisition through nitrogen fixation, constitute a GUILD"


SEQUENCE HOMOLOGY:

Orthologs: speciation

Paralogs: gene duplication

Exologs: horizontal gene transfer

------------------------------------------------------------------


PROCEDURE:
----------

1. Identify marker genes for each guild and chosen trait, e.g. nifH for nitrogen fixation guild within nitrogen acquisition trait

2. Scan genome prokaryote databases for genomes containing these genes. Thus making a table of taxa within each guild in each trait.

3. Scan metagenomes (derive from environment) for the selected marker genes. Using custom software "SqueezeMeta", which produces contigs with annotated genes (and taxonomy). Produce a second table, equivalent to the first one.  The idea is to use the information from genomes to fill in missed information from metagenomes (e.g. a taxon that is known  to have a gene that doesn't appear in metagenome).


WPs
----

WP1: Portable sequencing and analysis: MinION + SqueezeMeta on a cruise ship (Tamames, all PIs)

WP2: Microdiversity within guilds (Tamames, Pedrós)

WP3. Structure and function of prokaryotic guilds (Pedrós, all PIs)
     Identifying general principles in the way guilds are organized.

     "Then, it is easy to list the possible ecological roles of a taxon (the guilds in which it
      participates) and to infer its ecological similarity to others
      (comparing the respective guilds)."

      Key theoretical questions:
      1. Do all guilds show a structure of a few abundant and many rare species? Does this
         structure change with different types of resources, environments or through time?
         [NOTE: perhaps due to cooperation in another function)

     2. Do the different members of a guild predominate under different environmental
        conditions or do a few always dominate the guild?

     3. Do guilds with more members provide higher stability to the community?

     4. Is functional redundancy a common feature in marine microbial systems? Are there
        traits/environments in which it is more important? "We will measure a degree of
        competitive exclusion" between members of the guild: in how many instances members
        of the guild show co-exclusive patterns

     5. Can we define “superguilds” that is, groups of organisms sharing the same guild in
        different traits? E.g. Are PR-containing taxa usually found to degrade
        polysaccharides and use dissolved organic phosphorus?

        [NOTE: What about finding putative nested sets of taxa that share the same strategy
        for various resources. That would be like a subguild w.r.t to multiple functions]

     6. How particular members of a guild respond to environmental conditions?

WP4: Common methodology for metagenomic analyses and careful annotation of marker genes. (Jose & Tamames)

      Devoted to annotation of key marker genes that will define the guilds.

      Co-assembly + contig binning, proposing to reconstruct GEMs to infer reponse to
      environmental conditions.


WP5: Guilds with different TonB-dependent transporters (Jose, all PIs)
     Such as hability to import polysaccharides via TonB transporters in Flavobacteriia.

     Are TonB-dependent transporters specific or promiscous? (Connected to deep sea carbon
     pool perhaps)

     [NOTE] What about cooperation in communities, where taxa specialize in producing a TonB
      transporter for a specific substrate or group of related substrates. Then process
      carbon and excrete a common carbon source that all can import.

      In this manner, the communitiy is robust against stochastic variation of carbon sources
      and yet each taxa doesn't waste energy producing a complete array of transporters.
      Which, effectively, is what metabolic networks do, with central molecules such as the
      TCA intermediates.

NOTES:
-------

1. A species can fulfill a trait in more than one way, e.g., N2 fixation and NH4 acquisition, thus can belong to more than one guild.

2. Functional redundancy: In an ecosystem, several species have the hability to carry out the same function, such as N2 fixation. Thus making the function robust to perturbation and the ecosystem stable.

3. Stable environments would produce, via evolution, clear-cut guilds. Since nutrient sources are also stable, e.g. same source of Nitrogen, same source of Carbon, etc. An example could be a marine hidrothermal vent. Wheras variable environments, such as open waters, would necessarily increase functional diversity (or plasticity) since nutrient sources are subject to perturbations.


WP6: Photoheterotrophic guilds (Jose, all PIs)
     PR and TonB-transporters co-expressed. Also TonB-transporter fueled by H+ pump.
     Perhaps there is a functional link there.


QUESTIONS:
---------

1. Are guilds defined based on a single trait manner or multi-trait? i.e., a set of species could fulfill a trait in a similar way but another trait in different ways. Such as, acquire nitrogen through nitrogen fixation but cabron through carbon fixation or organic compounds.

I see that they mention Simberloff and Daya (1991) where this is recognized. Thus one taxon can belong to several guilds because (a) fulfills a trait in several ways and/or (b) based on multiple traits.

2. What set of functions are minimal for a prokaryotic cell to survive? i.e., are carried out by all species. Or, in other words, what determines that certain functions become specializations? Such as nitrogen acquisition.

3. Why intense competition? if they obtain nutrients in the same manner they would rather co-evolve, or?

Also, they may "compete" with respect to CO2, H2S and Light, but cooperate w.r.t. other resources, such as vitamins and cofactors.

Focusing on a single trait to evaluate guild dynamics is thus insufficient.

4. How will SqueezeMeta deal with the issue of wrong function annotation, particuarly when
   used on site, without internet connection?

5. Regarding orthologs and paralogs, how can we tell  them apart by comparing sequences? are orthologs always more similar between them than paralogs?

6. Are Gram+ and Gram- bacteria equally represented in marine environments? Thinking of double membrane and TonB transporters. What about archaea?


FIRST MEETING
-------------

Pfam, what is it, exactly?
Automatize, Jose's method
HMM vs Blast, blast does't work for non-model species
Predict genes for which automatic annotation is more prone to error?
      Number of domains
      Genetic context
      Pfam available